Welcome back as I mentioned in the previous video there are actually two types of a race.
One is called static and the other dynamic a race.
Now what is the difference between the two.
Well the one limitation of static or race is that they're fixed in size meaning you need to specify
the number of elements your array will hold ahead of time.
So in this case if this was a static array I would say create an array of seven items knowing beforehand
that in my grocery list I'm only going to have Max seven items because arrays are allocated in adjacent
blocks of memory when they're created.
There's no guarantee that after we've allocated 7 shelfs of memory that you can keep adding things on
especially in order we solve this problem with static arrays that require us to say ahead of time.
Hey I only want 7 shelfs of memory with dynamic race and dynamic arrays allow us to copy and rebuild
an array at a new location which with more memory.
If we wanted more memory so for example with our static array if we realize that we forgot another item
on our list and we need 8 items.
What happens is we copy this entire array.
We allocate 14 blocks of memory and paste this list plus the eighth item into that new location.
Let me show you how this works with code you see in languages like C++.
Let me scroll down over here in C++ which has static arrays to create an array.
You do something like this.
You would say int a.
And this says I want a new array that has a space of 20 items.
Or we can do something like.
Int b.
And then fill up the array of five items with 1 2 3 4 5 integers.
That's what it stands for numbers.
And because of this and because this is a static array in order for us to add a six item on here well
we would need to copy this entire array and move it over to completely different area of memory.
In order to create the space for it.
Now luckily for us when I showed you with javascript how to do this well we never have to worry about
it did we in our javascript example we never really allocated memory and that's because in javascript
and other languages like Python where you have lists and array list in Java they work like dynamic arrays.
They automatically allocate memory according to the increase in size of the array.
So right off the bat you're thinking dynamic arrays are way better easier.
I don't have to think about memory because of automatic resizing and that gets into a discussion of
managing memory which low level languages like C++ allow.
While higher level languages like javascript allow us to not think about memory and let the machine
take care of it for you.
There's times where maybe you do want to manage your memory and times where you don't need to based
on your needs.
Obviously having more control over memory allows you to really tweak things and make things faster and
that's why languages like C++ can be much faster than higher languages.
Higher level languages like javascript but we don't need to get into that.
What we want to get out of this lesson is that dynamic array expands as you add more elements.
So you don't need to determine the size ahead of time but you may have noticed something with dynamic
arrays.
You see over here how I have a point at all of one that is the same as the push command that we did
in the previous lesson.
But I have a star here that says it can be 0 of an why is that.
Well if we remember our array and let's remove the extra items here that we don't need so just say a
b c d if underneath the hood javascript and our machine only created four blocks of memory for this
array and we add another letter underneath the hood because this is a dynamic array.
It's going to loop over these items.
Copy them and move it to a different location with.
Now eight blocks of space.
So that we can keep adding on to here.
And you see here because we did this looping the operation becomes over and so that's something to keep
in mind although it's a minor detail.
It's good to know how things work underneath the hood and most of the time with the languages that you're
working and during interviews you will be talking about dynamic arrays and you won't have to worry about
allocating memory and thinking about the possibility that you might have to copy the array.
That's really low level but I wanted to show you how they work so that you have those fundamentals going
forth.
And I understand that when it comes to a raise just because you're adding at the end using the push
command you can assume that it's 0 of 1 most of the times or constant time but every once in a while
you might encounter a situation where it's all then linear time.
I'll see in the next video.